Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town on 13 February 2013. Government condemns rape and child abuse Cabinet has noted with concern the recent increase at the brutal manner of the crimes perpetrated against women and children. Cabinet condemns in the strongest term the abuse of women and children. The public is called upon to work with the law enforcement agencies in routing out this crime. Further Education and Training Colleges Centres of excellence for higher learning Cabinet noted the visit by President Jacob Zuma to the Tshwane South Further Education and Training (FET) College in Mapobane, Pretoria on 12 February 2013. The visit follows the meeting with all FET College Principals last year and was part of the stakeholder outreach programme ahead of the State of the Nation Address. The President encouraged learners to take full advantage of the learning opportunities offered at FET colleges that are in high employment demand within Government's infrastructure development programmes; furthermore there is financial aid for the needy but academically capable learners. The sectoral determination for farm workers Cabinet calls on all stakeholders in the farming sector to work with government in balancing the rights of farm workers with business imperatives of farmers. Cabinet reiterates the call made by President Zuma at the World Economic Forum to keep channels of communication open at all times to arrive at win-win solutions that benefit the country as a whole, while protecting the vulnerable, especially workers and the poor in our country. Foreign military assistance Cabinet noted the rapid arrest of the suspected coup plotters in Limpopo. Cabinet reiterated that South Africa is a peace-loving country. It will not tolerate any grouping that seeks to use its country as a launching pad in destabilising any democratically elected government. Africa Cup of Nations 2013 Cabinet commended the Minister of Sport and Recreation, Minister Fikile Mbalula and the Local Organising Committee for leading a successful and historic Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON) 2013. Once again, the tournament demonstrated South Africa s ability to organise world-class events beyond expectation. Cabinet wishes to take this opportunity to congratulate the Super Eagles of Nigeria for their outstanding performance and victory at the tournament. Cabinet also commends South Africans for the good spirit in which they hosted the teams and visitors from across the continent. Appointments Cabinet congratulates all the appointees and wishes them well in their new responsibilities. Enquiries: Phumla Williams Acting Cabinet Spokesperson Cell: 083 501 0139Issued by: Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)